SQL for developers: a six week curriculum
=========================================

I would like to teach a hands on course in SQL for developers. In it,
students should build their own database to model an application they
care about, populate it with data that reflect ongoing use of the
application, perform a wide range of simple and advanced queries on the
data, in order to support the application itself and reporting on the
application, and take steps to make sure all these things can be done
within reasonable limits of time and space.

Prerequisites: you should be able to connect to a database with minimal
assistance and issue basic SQL queries. Consider boning up on your
command-line-compatible editor (vim, emacs, nano, ...) since by week 4
at the latest we will be making heavy use of the psql command line
client and editing complex queries there.

\pagebreak

Week 1: Introduction and the relational data model
--------------------------------------------------

For the first class, let's talk about how we got to relational
databases, how they compare to other kinds of databases, and the
approach we'll take in the course.

### Relational vs other databases

Hierarchical: IMS, 1966-now. Apollo program BOM.

Network: Designed by CODASYL in 1969. DDL, DML. COBOL and PL/I. Major
implementations: IDMS, IDS

Relational: Edgar F. "Ted" Codd 1969/1970. IBM was slow to implement,
and when they did, Codd was not included, nor was his original
relational language "Alpha". SEQUEL invented instead, shortened to SQL,
was used also by Oracle, Sybase, and by 1986 was an ANSI standard.

"Beyond" relational: Object databases, document / key value stores,
graph databases

Column vs row-oriented

Relations to tables

### The rest of the course

The goal for the course is to design and build a moderately complex
database to support a hypothetical application of the student's choice,
populate it with test or simulated data, and use it as a basis for
simple and advanced SQL queries, analyzing their performance and
discussing other real-world implications and concerns.

We'll use PostgreSQL 9.5 or greater, installed in the location of the
student's choice.

### Practicalities

psql command line client

Pager set up, `\x`

`\e`

`\d...`

### For week 2

You must be set up and running with your DB and client tools. You should
come to week 2 with an idea and some design sketches for a
database-driven application that can serve as a basis for the rest of
the course.

\pagebreak

Week 2 + 3: Data design
-------------------

### Basic modeling

Entity-relationship

Enums, domains, and data types

NULL

Keys, Foreign Keys

Natural vs artificial IDs

### Normalization

Normalization is the DRY of data

These normal forms "stack;" meeting one is dependent first on meeting
all prior forms.

First normal form (1NF): All column values are singular. Achieved by...creating more tables.

Second normal form (2NF): We have to get into candidate keys, prime vs
non-prime attributes. Strictly speaking, all non-prime attributes must
depend on the whole of any candidate key, and never on a subset of any
candidate key. Achieved by...creating more tables.

Third normal form (3NF): "Every non-prime attribute of R is
non-transitively dependent on every key of R" or "a non-key field must
provide a fact about the key, us[e] the whole key, and nothing but the key."

Boyce-Codd normal form (BCNF/3.5NF) and Elementary Key Normal Form (EKNF):
Where a "superkey" is a non-minimal candidate key, there are some
nuanced scenarios under which 3NF can leave redundancies or dependencies
between superkeys. These two somewhat incompatible normal forms express
the resolution of these scenarios.

3NF is generally what is meant when we say a database is normalized,
although 4NF and 5NF have more to say about expressing dependencies in a
non-redundant way, and will generally lead to still more decomposition
of tables if correctly followed. Likewise with 6NF, which has two
competing specific uses.

Normalization for OLTP vs OLAP, Star/snowflake schemas

### For week 3

For week 3 you should complete simple ER modeling of your application
and have a draft of your DB schema for PostgreSQL. In the week 3 class
we'll refine our designs and hit these more advanced design concepts:

### Tricky things

Modeling inheritance

Modeling hierarchies

### Higher-level design: composing relations

Views

Triggers

### For week 4

Complete your design and sketch out the application processes that
create the data; we'll use these as a basis for creating or simulating
data going forward.

\pagebreak

Week 4: Creating data
---------------------

### Complex DML

INSERT...SELECT

UPDATE...FROM

DELETE FROM...USING

### Concurrency

Consistency models

Locking

Transactions, savepoints, MVCC

(Don't spend too much time on concurrency, but rather try to get a head
start on the week 5 stuff.)

### For week 5:

Have good processes to repeatedly simulate data generation such that we
can get representative query results, and use them to determine where
performance improvements need to be made.

\pagebreak

Week 5: Advanced Querying
-------------------------

### Joins

Inner joins

Outer joins

What, I can join on myself?

### Aggregation

GROUP BY along with COUNT, MIN, MAX, ...

HAVING

Window functions, DISTINCT BY, and other roll-ups

Table sampling (woo, PostgreSQL 9.5)

### Subqueries

"Inline views"

Exists, IN

Correlated subqueries

CTEs

Revisit hierarchies with recursive CTEs

### Miscellaneous

SELECT DISTINCT

UNION

### For week 6

You should come up with still more useful queries, ideas for views, many
of which should need some performance improvement.

\pagebreak

Week 6: Performance & Indexing
------------------------------

### Performance

Interpreting EXPLAIN output: circle back to relational operations

Ordering, ranges

### Indexing

What is an index really?

Types of indexes

Tradeoffs

### PostgreSQL vs MySQL vs ...

\pagebreak

Appendix A: More resources
-------------------

[18+ Best Online Resources for Learning SQL and Database Concepts](
http://www.vertabelo.com/blog/notes-from-the-lab/18-best-online-resources-for-learning-sql-and-database
)

[Jepsen series on distributed systems correctness](
https://aphyr.com/tags/Jepsen )

[Readings in Database Systems]( http://www.redbook.io/ )

Appendix B: Sources
-------------------

[A Simple Guide to Five Normal Forms in Relational Database Theory](
http://www.bkent.net/Doc/simple5.htm )
